✅ SECTION 1 — 25 Q&A for C(1): Solidity Program for Student Data (Structures, Arrays, Fallback)

Based fully on the given Solidity code + related concepts + blockchain fundamentals.

1. What is Solidity?

Solidity is a contract-oriented programming language used to develop smart contracts on Ethereum and other EVM-compatible blockchains.

2. What does the pragma solidity ^0.8.0 line mean?

It specifies the compiler version, allowing versions 0.8.0 and above but not below.

3. What Solidity construct is used to represent a student?

A struct (Student) containing name and rollno.

4. Why do we use a dynamic array in this program?

To store multiple students of unknown size:

Student[] public studentArr;

5. What is the purpose of the addStudent() function?

To add a new student while ensuring no duplicate roll numbers exist.

6. What does the revert() statement do?

It stops execution and reverts the transaction, refunding unused gas.

7. Why do we check roll number before adding a student?

To prevent duplicates and maintain data integrity.

8. What is the visibility of displayAllStudents()?

view – It reads blockchain state without modifying it.

9. What does returns(Student[] memory) indicate?

The function returns an array of students stored in memory, not storage.

10. What mistake exists in getStudentByIndex()?

The condition

index < studentArr.length || index > studentArr.length


is wrong. It should be:

require(index < studentArr.length, "Index out of bound");

11. What does the fallback function do in Solidity?

A fallback function handles:

Direct Ether transfers with no function call

Calls to undefined functions

(Your code currently lacks fallback; should be added.)

12. Why might we include a fallback function in this contract?

To prevent accidental Ether transfers or handle unexpected function calls gracefully.

13. Is this contract payable?

No, it does not accept Ether because no function is marked payable.

14. Where is student data stored?

Permanently on blockchain storage, inside the studentArr array.

15. Does the contract support deletion of students?

No, only insertion and retrieval exist.

16. What is gas in Ethereum?

Gas is the fee required to execute operations on the blockchain.

17. Which function costs the most gas?

addStudent() because it:

Iterates through the array

Modifies blockchain storage (most expensive operation)

18. Which functions are gas-free?

view functions executed off-chain:

displayAllStudents()

getStudentByIndex()

getLengthOfStudents()

19. What happens if two students have the same name?

Allowed. Only roll number must be unique.

20. Why do we use public visibility on the array?

So Solidity automatically creates a getter function.

21. On deployment, how much gas does the constructor consume?

Minimal, because no data storage or complex logic is executed.

22. Does this contract follow mappings or arrays? Why?

It uses arrays, but mappings would be more efficient for checking duplicates.

23. What is the type of rollno?

uint → unsigned integer (256-bit by default).

24. Can this contract be upgraded after deployment?

No, Solidity contracts are immutable unless a proxy pattern is used.

25. Can this contract store unlimited students?

Yes, but gas costs increase as the array grows.

✅ SECTION 2 — Additional Solidity Programming Questions (General Viva Questions)
🔥 Basic Solidity Questions

What is a smart contract?
A self-executing program stored on the blockchain.

Difference between memory and storage?

memory → temporary RAM

storage → permanent blockchain storage

What is msg.sender?
The address that called the contract.

What is msg.value?
Amount of Ether sent with a transaction.

What does payable mean?
A function can receive Ether.

Difference between view and pure?

view → reads state

pure → reads neither state nor blockchain variables

What is a constructor?
Function that runs only once at deployment.

Why are mappings used?
Fast O(1) key-value storage.

Why is blockchain immutable?
Data cannot be changed after writing.

What is an event?
Used to log information for off-chain applications.

🔥 Intermediate Solidity Questions

What is gas limit?
Maximum amount of gas the sender is willing to spend.

What is block.timestamp?
Timestamp of the current block.

What is a modifier?
A reusable condition like onlyOwner.

What is inheritance?
Solidity supports contract inheritance using is.

Difference between external and public?

external: cannot be used internally without this.

public: callable internally and externally.

🔥 Advanced Solidity Questions

What is re-entrancy attack?
When a malicious contract repeatedly calls back before the function completes.

How do you prevent re-entrancy?
Use Checks-Effects-Interactions pattern or ReentrancyGuard.

What is ABI?
Application Binary Interface — blueprint for interacting with contracts.

What is the EVM?
Ethereum Virtual Machine; executes contract bytecode.

What is the difference between fallback and receive?

receive() → handles plain Ether transfers

fallback() → handles unknown function calls or data